[Music]
is the hijab 10
discount code for 10 percent discount on
a wide range of products including
premium ethiopian black seed products
so how are you guys doing
today me and delhi hussain are going to
be looking at
some of the comments that jordan
peterson has made about islam
and responding but before we do so
obviously we know that he's in rehab
so what do we want to say we wish him
all the best and you know
a good recovery and a whole whatever
difficulties
mental physically he's going through
that you know it's eased and
you know that he goes back to his family
and loved ones in a good state
absolutely let's get straight into this
um the first video i want to react to
is basically like a minute long video um
let's watch
the key part
part of the reason that islam has its
back up with regards to the west to such
a degree
i mean there's many reasons and not all
of them are valid that's for sure but
one of the reasons is that you know they
being still grounded in a
in a in a dream let's say they can see
that the rootless
questioning mind of the west poses a
tremendous danger to the integrity of
their culture
now and it does i mean westerners us
we undermine ourselves all the time with
our searching intellect and i'm not
complaining about that
you know i mean it it there isn't
anything easy that can be done about it
but
but it's still it's still a sort of
fruitful catastrophe let's be very clear
as well first and foremost the only
thing that muslims
are scared of as you mentioned rightly
so i'm taking your line from you
is when the next bomb is dropping above
the skies and the next drone attack
that's the only thing that muslims
generally are
scared of i'm happy that you use the
word muslims because like
in the readings usually when islam is
spoken of it's actually usually spoken
of
either in a religious sense or
civilization or civilizational sense but
now we don't have an islamic
civilization
the the last caliphate was you know it
was 1924 yeah
so so we don't have a muslims of islam
to be spoken of in that way we just have
1.8 billion muslims
which i find difficult to generalize in
a few sentences
much less a minute one minute absolutely
i mean look there's 57
muslim majority nation states he's not
even referring to the oic or the arab
league or anything like this
but i think the point he's trying to get
at which is uh unequivocally incorrect
is that
islam or let's just say muslims are
scared of
alternative thinking of challenging
their views challenging their
epistemology in the way
judeo-christianity has done right but we
can quickly nip that on the bud
every world view every civilization if
he was referring to islam from a
civilizational point of view which
wouldn't be factual in this present
moment in time
over the last 89 years is that every
world view
has its mechanisms in place to not just
preserve
its belief system and values but to
actually advance it
so this is not something that's unique
to islamists to all civilization all
world views yeah
yeah but since we don't have an islamic
civilization at the moment we can only
assume that he's referring to 1.8
billion muslims
and the only thing they're scared of as
we've already mentioned is when their
countries are going to be invaded when
their resources haven't been looted and
when the next bombs are going to come
under the name of democracy
that's the only really thing that they
are actually scared of i think
that is pretty much sufficient and i
think if we wanted to add one last point
it would be
that from a historical perspective i
mean we do know that the advancement
of science in fact the scientific method
itself
has been through muslim scientists like
him hatham et cetera
and obviously uh the polymaths that
existed and i've actually got
i've got a video on that the top 10
polymaths
in muslim world so you can look at some
of those names they all existed in
islamic civilization and by the way not
all of them were muslims
like some of the greatest jewish
thinkers like maimonides for example
existed on the muslim rule yeah what you
have to look at is the convavencio
that happened in spain if for i don't
know 600 years or whatever it was
and so you gotta look at all these
aspects if we're looking if we're
talking
in a historical way then once again the
the statement is so
hastily generalized that it's actually
beggars believe that someone of such
high intellectual standing would make
such a generalized
also also we have sex i mean if we're to
go by
what western thinkers and rulers and
governments and establishment states
have said
especially in the wake of 9 11 there is
been a consistent theme
that they are after they are after and
by they they talk about islamist
extremists or whatever they want to say
they want to change our way of life
our way of life our freedoms our
democracy so
if there's anything that can be posited
is that the west is good
because because islam holistically
provides an alternative to mankind
right so really but it's interesting
because we're scared but we're meant to
be the one that inflicting
exactly exactly are we are we are we
scared are we the victim here or are we
the perpetrator
are we the terrorists yes because it
seems like you want to have your cake
yeah
and eat it both but we'll come to that
when we speak about the next video
um let's let's see another thing which i
think is probably the most comprehensive
clip that he has on the internet about
islam
where he speaks about someone asks him a
very long question in one of his
lectures and he asks him about the
different similarities and differences
between islam and christianity and
judaism
and let's take a look at his answer
let's take a look at what he says
and so one is what i see as the failure
to separate church from state
and that's a problem
now it may not be a problem as such but
it's certainly a problem in relationship
to the relation between islam and the
west because we separate church from
state
so the first thing he spoke about was
basically secularism yeah
so he's he's saying that the problem
with islam is that it's
incapability of being secular in the
same way as christianity is for obvious
reasons
obviously there's a verse in the bible
about caesar and of course and and
jesus and so i've got to remember to see
that what belongs to
god belongs to god so um what do you
make of this
bro as a as a student of politics right
we were always taught
uh at university on a ba level that the
church generally was an oppressive
structure
in europe right and that includes
obviously the eastern byzantium empire
as well right
because they prevented the advancement
of human intellect
on so many levels the very fact that the
bible was not accessible from from
a linguistic point of view to the masses
the very fact that women
were kind of discouraged from accessing
the bible so it makes
absolute sense that christianity
as an establishment as a polity whether
you look at it from the vatican point of
view or from the eastern point of view
that it was already seen as an
oppressive mode of system which
prevented human advances and even that
requires some discussion exactly of
course
however that is not the experience that
muslims had with islam
in fact you'll actually find that under
various islamic caliphates emirates
sultanates and so forth
that human advancement in the fields of
maths and science was something that was
encouraged and actually
linked to the polity the state the
civilization and the religion itself
so this is a huge and common and
repetitive mistake
that many western thinkers especially
liberals make when they try to
superimpose the
european christian experience to the
muslim world and it's actually quite
clear that when
muslims moved away from islam from a
holistic civilizational point of view
that is when our problems occurred
and for me i think i see another problem
with this whole thing as well which is
that
really how do you prove secularism is
true absolutely
i mean on an epistemological perspective
you're starting with the
starting point which is that secularism
is true islam is not inc
it's not um compatible with it therefore
islam is not it's not or it's not true
or it's not good or it's not
uh what we want it to be but the point
is
why don't you prove your secularism to
us
on an epistemological perspective is it
objectively true absolutely is it
something which can be measurably um
seen to be true i i don't think it is
and and this is where you start with
it's like me saying well look at the
christian experience or whatever
experience it's not in line with islam
this is not really um a fair starting
point a first time point is to actually
have
epistemology argued in the first place
from first principles
for either islam and or secularism
tested scrutinized and that's happened
and let's have that discussion but
you're starting off with within that you
represent the default right you don't
we remember that the separation of
church and state is distinctly european
and it's a new phenomena as is the
nation state as professor noam chomsky
in a recent podcast i did with him about
the nation state yes
and the caliphate um even you know he's
a very one of the most celebrated
thinkers of our century right
and even he said that look the nation
state is very new
and and and all these other isms and
schisms were born out of
europe's struggle with christianity and
it's not necessarily applicable
to let's say the islamic civilization
but he made the same
he made a similar assumption as peterson
when he said
that centralized authority in the form
of a caliphate is something that's
discouraging he doesn't support them but
let me tell you something is interesting
because i remember one quote
maybe someone will find it for me but
they said in this quote that
you tell me what religion is and i'll
tell you what secularism is yeah
the assumption also is always that
liberalism and democracy and marxism
communism all those ideology political
ideologies are not religious
but that of course depends upon the
sociological definition of religion that
you're going to employ
absolutely there are many sociological
definitions employed
which would allow these ideologies to to
actually be defined as the religions
and if they are a way of life as a
religion and if they are then secularism
for all intents and purposes in the west
doesn't actually exist
anyway yeah it's really just not if only
we wanna we want to
um you know connect religion with
ritualistic practices in the
supernatural yeah
it would have to be that definition of
religion which would mean
that secularism is is only applicable
for one group of people if i can quickly
just also just you know wrap up this
whole kind of church and state kind of
thing yeah
look there's there's a huge conversation
that's taken place especially in the
last 20 years amongst uh you know um
thinkers and think tanks and entire
governments that when will the muslim
majority world have an enlightenment
yeah the truth be told is that there
won't be an enlightenment in which you
envision
where they want an unequivocal and quite
an apparent separation of religion of
the state well that's already in place
in the muslim majority world
majority of the muslim majority nation
states are secular in their constitution
with exception to a handful
and even they have many secular elements
the point i'm trying to make is the
reason why there was the
the enlightenment the pulse
enlightenment all those other uh you
know
historical moments and events in
european history
it was born out of the people's struggle
with
the christian power structures that
didn't take place in the muslim world
because there wasn't an intellectual
opposition between the state or
civilization
and the masses and the religion itself
right so let's look at the second part
of this
particular video problem number two for
me
and again this may be a consequence of
my ignorance which i'm trying to rectify
muhammad was a warlord
and i i don't know what to do about that
fact
so here when he's referring to the
prophet muhammad he refers to him as a
warlord yeah
now what i find really strange about
this
is he's not using neutral language as an
intellectual if you want to describe a
historical character who whoever it may
be
you should have the integrity to use
neutral language a warlord is not
neutral language you could
you could very how much i've said
militarily successful
yes and it would have had exactly the
same effect but of course
attaching the word successful or using
it as an adjective for the prophet
muhammad would
defy quite frankly what seems to be your
agenda
even though throughout this clip he
keeps saying that he's ignorant of islam
to protect his honor and his integrity
hopefully i'll get an opportunity to
talk to them because i would like to
know why
i would like to know if what i think is
wrong
because if it's wrong it's important
that i know it's wrong
now what i don't know about islam would
fill very many volumes
many of which i have sitting on my
shelves at home right now because i want
to do the reading you know
as i progress through this but
yeah all his um
whatever it is he's trying to protect
but the truth of the matter is you are
making so many assertions
if you're ignorant you should really not
say anything at all about this situation
but you have said that a warlord the
problem with this
a secondary problem that i see with it
is that
he was just praising quite frankly and
he does in other places western values
one of the hallmarks of western
civilization is liberalism
and not just political liberalism or
social liberalism but also economic
liberalism which is also
known as capitalism right free market
economics yeah
but at the heart of free market
economics and
supply side economics is um competition
competition right and meritocracy
and if that is the case those who are
most expansive
those who are most successful militarily
financially and so on are the most
praised
are the most praised exactly so on your
world view
shouldn't the prophet muhammad if he is
a warlord according to your
understanding
of it be praised for being that in fact
jesus on the conception of christianity
would be a failure on the capitalistic
or liberal model
because jesus was according to the
obviously we don't believe in this as
muslims we don't believe in this at all
but
according to the christian model was
killed he was crucified and so on it was
beaten his lash was spat
humiliated and all of these things now
wouldn't this fit
a model of a competitive failure
he actually did not triumph over his uh
opposition
i mean put it in modern parlance it's
like an mma fight taking place
and the loser being praised absolutely
this wouldn't take place
i'm sorry but what seems to be happening
is you're actually using aesthetic value
judgments
um putting aside those values which you
claim in other places
are good values and so now i read
infidel
and i really like that book like i i my
sense was that she
she was a heroine there's another part
of this clip where he talks and praises
ayan hershey
um saying that she's come up you know
certain family
you know to tell he used to a
totalitarian even though he hasn't heard
the side of her mother or her father
yeah and once again he's privileging her
voice over their voices
which is problematic quite frankly
because she came out of a
uh like a totalitarian
let's say family structure in a
relatively totalitarian society
yeah so what do you think so look i mean
he wasn't exactly very specific with
regards to what he's referring to as
totalitarian how do you
had he been referring to let's say
somalia as a society or a country then
we can you know analyze this and
you know scrutinize his his assessment
of this but he mentioned hierarchy
and he mentioned structures now the
irony here is that jordan peterson
previously in various interviews he's
actually
praised certain elements of certain
structures
yeah hierarchies especially those that
have a heavy male presence hence why
he one of his many criticisms from the
feminist is that this man is a
perpetuator of patriarchal systems
so here we find yet again another
inconsistent what appears to be an
inconsistency
where he has on record praised certain
structures
which has been interpreted as
totalitarian by let's say
uh feminists and others but here he has
he has a problem
he is praising ayan hirsi for moving
away from a totalitarian structure and
hierarchy
yeah i think what's happening with
jordan peace i think a lot of people
realize is that
if he actually assesses his own views
and compares them with islam he would
see that much of his views are
very similar to the islamic model very
compatible very competitive
but i think that there may be an agenda
yeah you know someone could say that
he's being influenced by some of his
friends and yeah sam harris imagine
noise douglas murray and hershey he has
been around their influence and these
are some of the
and it's actually i don't know quite
frankly is making him not see
the full the full picture but jordan
pearson to be fair to him right is not
always
unnuanced analysis like for example when
he was asked one time about the age of
haisha
um his marriage to the age of ayasha
was union of her a young age he actually
answered in a very nuanced way let's
take a look at what he actually said
he had a child bride as well i believe
yeah well that
that one is somewhat less problematic to
me
because i think that you can write that
off to the
cultural maurice of the time so as you
can see here he's very nuanced he
doesn't see this as completely
like he even says it's not that
problematic for me which
i mean to be honest this is the main
argument against islam for many of the
islamophobes
yeah so i i do think there's a lot to be
said here but
of course me and you are both very happy
to to host this man
yeah when he gets better or his daughter
i think she has a
podcast as well we can we can share our
muslim perspective
and i believe that more people need to
hear this muslim
perspective we'll put our emails in the
description just put your title as your
name
and we'll be happy either of us to have
you on our podcast
is there anything else you want to say
no i mean you can come over here in the
uk we'll come and see you over in canada
or we can do it on zoom yeah whether
it's convenient for you mr peterson
and mr dr peterson you should say no
mister will suffice
he just stripped some of his title yeah
that's fine he's not well at the moment
so on that note um on that note i'll say
you know hopefully get better and
hopefully when you get a chance you can
you can re
research islam a little bit more you you
wanna you know the best cure for
ignorance is a question
but the best question is that which is
asked to the right people
and i hope you ask the muslim community
about islam
not those individuals that you're
hanging around was
allah
you